1.1 Definitions
In this calendar, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context:

a. "Board" means the Federal Board of Intermediate & Secondary Education Islamabad.
b. "Chairman, Secretary and Controllers of Examinations" means Chairman, Secretary and Controller of the Examination of the Board.
c. "Head of an Institution" means the Principal of a College or Higher Secondary School or the Headmaster or Headmistress of a School.
d. "Headmaster" and "Headmistress" include the Principal of School.
e. "Institution" means a college or a school.
f. "Teacher" means a person engaged in teaching work in affiliated institution or in an institution affiliated to a University or any other person recognized as such by the Board.
g. "Student" means a regular student on the roll of an affiliated institution.
h. "Examination" means an examination conducted by the Board and includes an examination recognized as equivalent.
i. "Teaching Experience" denotes teaching experience in the subject in an institution recognized by the Board or a College affiliated to a recognized University.
j. "Superintendent" means a teacher/person who acts as the Superintendent of an examination centre of the Board.
k. "Examination Centre" means a premises used by the Board for holding an examination.
l. "Prescribed" means prescribed in the regulations or prescribed by the Board, in any form, as the case may be.
m. "Answer Book" means the document containing the answer or answers as given by a candidate during examination to the question or questions contained in the question paper meant for the said examination (and include a part of an answer book).
n. "Question Paper" means a document containing the question(s) to be given at an examination to be answered by the candidate.
o. "Examiner" means a person appointed by the Board for the purpose of examining and assessing the answer books of a candidate or his/her ability through a written or oral/practical examination and award marks thereof. This also includes a person appointed to check the standard of marking of such examiner and instructing him/her in assessing the marks to be awarded by him/her and also includes a person who sets a question paper.
p. "Academic year" means the total period during which instructions are imparted by the institution.
q. "Ex-student" means a regular student after having appeared SSC-II/HSSC-II examination and declared fail.
r. "Private Candidate" means a candidate not on the rolls of an affiliated institution after 31st December and 31st January at SSC and HSSC levels respectively, before appearing in the examination.
s. "Tabulator" means a person, specially engaged for tabulating the result from counterfoils of award lists or from such other material as may be provided to him/her by the office.
t. "Scrutineer" means a person engaged to check the compilation of the result by comparison of award lists and the result sheets prepared by the office.
u. The words imparting the masculine gender be taken to include females, and words in singular shall include the plural and vice versa.
v. Terms not expressly defined in the regulations shall bear an interpretation that may be determined by the Board.
w. "Sessional" Means the part of practical (assessed by the institute) i.e. the job sheets, design, project and report completed within the period allocated for purpose in the scheme of studies during an academic session.
x. "Final" Means the part of practical examination/Viva Voce conducted by an external examiner (Appointed by the Board) of the marks allocated for this purpose in the scheme of studies.

1.2 General
a. All examinations of the Board shall be held at such places and dates as it may decide from time to time. The date for commencement of examination as well as the last date for the receipt of examination forms and fees shall be notified through institutions and the local press well in advance.
b. The fees of admission to examination shall be such as may be determined by the Board from time to time.
c. The programme of practical examination shall be notified through the respective institutions and centre of examinations.
d. It shall be the responsibility of candidates to find out and know the correct date, time, place of examination and the seats earmarked for and allotted to them at the centre of examinations.
e. (1) All registered students of an affiliated institution shall be eligible for admission to the examination of the Board as provided under these rules.
(2) Private candidates who fulfill the conditions laid down for their admission to the examination shall be eligible to sit in the examination.
(3) Such other students shall be eligible for admission to the Board's examination as may be permitted by the Chairman to appear from time to time.
f. A candidate who ignores the cautions, warnings and instructions prescribed by the Board shall himself/herself be responsible for any mistake or eventual mishap, which may occur to him/her at the examination.
g. The following shall be the medium of examination: (1) Urdu (2) English (3) Approved provincial language.
h. Action taken by the Chairman towards regulating the examinations and ensuring that the examinations are conducted and concluded satisfactorily shall not be called into question in any executive, administrative or judicial proceedings except the Controlling Authority i.e. Board of Governors and the Ministry of Education.
i. The Chairman shall have power to exclude any candidate from any examination, if he/she is satisfied that such a candidate is not a right person to appear in it.
j. Notwithstanding anything contrary to these rules, no candidate who is undergoing any restriction at the time of submitting the application form or during the period of examination or who was expelled during the academic year just preceding the date of examination at which he/she intends to appear shall be admitted to the examination.
k. The students who have completed their studies from affiliated institutions of FBISE in abroad and thereafter returned and settled in Pakistan shall be treated at par with local/inland students for different payment on submission of documentary proof.
l. Existing Examination Rules for SSC shall be applicable for SSC Technical Group.
m. No private candidate shall be allowed to appear in SSC (Technical Group).
n. There would be no gender discrimination for opting any trade of the Technical Group.

1.3 Re-examination/Quashing/Revision of Results
a. If the Chairman is satisfied that a situation did arise or has arisen which calls for reexamination of paper(s) in particular subject(s), it may issue necessary directions to that effect.
b. Notwithstanding anything contrary to these rules the Chairman shall have the power to:
(1) hold a special examination for any reason;
(2) cancel the paper/entire examination(s) held at a particular centre/all centres if he is satisfied that the examination has not been held under proper conditions.
c. The Chairman shall have the power to quash the result of candidate wholly or partially after it has been declared, in case:
(1) he/she has been disqualified on account of using unfairness in the examination;
(2) a mistake is found in his/her result;
(3) it is found that he/she was not eligible to appear in the examination;
(4) there is any other reason which may be determined by the Chairman.

1.4 Loss of answer book(s) of a candidate
a. If any answer book of candidate is lost at the centre after having been received by the Centre Superintendent or by any of the invigilator(s) or in transition and if he/she passes in all other subjects of the examination, he/she may be required to reappear in that particular paper.
b. If an answer book of a candidate received by the office or by an examiner is lost, the Chairman shall have the power to decide:
(1) whether the candidate be given the average of marks earned by him in the missing paper;
(2) whether the candidate be required to appear again in that paper.
c. The following formula shall be applicable for determining the average of missing paper(s):
(1) Compulsory Paper(s): Average of other Compulsory Papers
(2) Science Paper(s): Average of other Science Papers
(3) Elective/optional Paper(s): Average of other Elective/optional Paper(s)
(4) Practical Papers(s): Average of other Practical Papers
(5) Average of Mathematics Paper shall be determined either on the average of Science Papers or on the average of Elective Papers.
(6) Objective paper(s) (Compulsory): Average of other compulsory objective paper(s).
(7) Objective paper(s) (Elective/optional): Average of other Elective/optional objective paper(s).
(8) Subjective paper(s) (Compulsory): Average of other Compulsory Subjective paper(s).
(9) Subjective paper(s) (Elective/optional): Average of other Elective/optional Subjective paper(s).
d. In case of a dispute whether answer book(s) of candidate(s) was/were duly received or not, the decision of the Chairman shall be final.

1.5 Recounting of marks of answers book(s)
a. The answer book of a candidate in any examination shall not be reassessed under any circumstances. However, after publication of results, if a candidate has strong grounds that some mistake has been made, he/she may apply to the Controller of Examinations (Secrecy) for recounting of marks on payment of prescribed fee.
b. Application for recounting shall be received upto 20 days from the date of announcement of the result.
c. The Chairman may accept the application for recounting upto 10 days from the expiry of the date in exceptional cases.
d. Recounting does not mean reassessment or re-evaluation. The Chairman or Recounting Committee shall see that:
(1) there is no mistake in the grand total on the title page;
(2) the total of various parts of a question has been correctly made;
(3) all totals have been correctly brought forward on the title page;
(4) no portion of any answer has been left un-marked;
(5) total marks in the answer book tally with the marks sheet;
(6) the answer book or any part thereof has not been changed/detached;
(7) the handwriting of the candidate tally in the questions/answer book.
e. The Recounting Committee shall report any omission or mistake to the Controller of Examinations for approval by the Chairman.
f. If the Recounting Committee finds any discrepancy by which marks are decreased, the record shall be corrected and revised marks sheet issued.
g. If any candidate refuses to surrender his/her marks sheet, his result shall be liable to cancellation.
h. The Chairman shall have the powers to effect recovery of the marks sheet by force through law enforcing agencies.
i. (1) The Controller of Exams (Secrecy) with approval of Chairman shall constitute Recounting Committee(s) on yearly basis.
(2) The candidate(s) may see his/her answer script(s) up to the extent of identifying the script as his/her own.
(3) In case of any change in marks, the recounting fee shall be refunded.
j. (i) Non-mentioning the version by a candidate, MCQs shall be evaluated against all keys/versions and award of better marks shall be given.
(ii) Failure of machine to read an OMR sheet due to technical reasons shall be checked by a Committee.
(iii) Cases of mismatch between marks of machine and examiners shall be re-ascertained.

1.6 Refund of examination fee
Examination fee once paid shall not be refunded or transferred except in the following cases:
a. If name is withdrawn due to short attendance at least 30 days before examination, 90% refund.
b. If candidate is declared ineligible, 90% refund.
c. If excess amount is paid, excess shall be refunded.
d. If admission form is not submitted and candidate has not taken examination, 90% refund.
e. If candidate is declared pass on recounting basis, 90% refund.
f. If a candidate dies before appearing in examination, 100% refund to legal heirs.
g. Claim for refund must be made within one year.
h. Amount deposited erroneously shall be refunded.
i. Fee should be refunded in case of non-utilization of services.
j. In case of discrepancy established on part of Board, fee refunded without deduction.
k. 10% service charges deducted on refund cases except f & j.
l. Amount less than Rs. 500 should not be refunded.
m. Secretary FBISE is sanctioning authority for all refund cases.

1.7 Appointment of Amanuensis/Writer
a. An amanuensis shall be allowed for: (1) a blind candidate; (2) a candidate permanently or temporarily disabled from writing.
b. Application on prescribed form to Controller of Examinations.
c. Medical certificate from civil surgeon/Specialist of Govt. Hospital required.
d. Amanuensis shall be 8th class student for SSC exams and matriculate for HSSC exams.
e. Centre Superintendent shall arrange separate accommodation and special invigilator.
f. No remuneration to amanuensis from Board. Special invigilator paid by Board.
g. No additional fee from candidate. Incentive (per paper) equal to invigilator remuneration given to writer.
h. Disabled/Blind/Amanuensis candidates given 45 minutes extra time.

1.8 Change of examination centre
a. Change of centre not allowed under normal circumstances.
b. Allowed if father/guardian transferred/retired/shifted within Pakistan or abroad, with supporting documents.
c. Each application shall be accompanied by prescribed fee, non-refundable.
d. No change from one centre to another in same city/twin city allowed.
e. Application ordinarily entertained upto 30 days before examination.
f. Chairman may order change of centre at any time without disclosing reason.

1.9 Inspection of Examination Centre
a. Every examination centre open to inspection by Chairman/Secretary/Controller of Examinations.
b. Centre Inspectors shall visit centres to check proper conduct of examinations.
c. Centre Inspectors drawn from Board's Members, officers, retired/serving Inspectors of Schools, etc.
d. Every centre inspector shall submit report on same day to Controller of Examinations (Conduct).
e. Principal of each institution shall be appointed as Resident Inspector with specific Terms of Reference including checking seals, affixing signatures, maintaining law and order, etc.

1.10 Conditions for qualifying the examination
a. Candidate must pass in all subjects. Where subject comprises two/three papers, pass on aggregate of marks.
b. Where subject involves practical, pass theory and practical separately.
c. Minimum qualifying marks: 33% in theory and practical separately. For Diploma Courses: 40% in theory component, 50% in practical component (sessional and final separately).
d. Marks in theory paper-II combined with marks of theory paper-II at SSC/HSSC levels.
e. If candidate fails in either theory or practical, marks not combined for aggregate.
f. If fails on aggregate, declared fail in paper(s) actually failed.
g. Appearance in all papers of a subject necessary for result compilation.
h. If fails on aggregate, allowed to appear in compartmental/failure paper(s).
i. Failing in more than 2 subjects in SSC-II/HSSC-II must appear in all subjects as fresh. Failing in 2 or less placed under compartment with 5 subsequent attempts.
j. Regular/private candidate not appearing in Part-I may appear in Part-I or both parts.
k. Grace marks up to 1% of total marks for failing candidates and additional subject candidates.
l. One mark allowed to candidates losing higher grade by one mark.
m. No grace marks for improvement of marks/grade candidates.
n. Chairman may grant up to 5 marks for extreme hardship.
o. Word 'Retry' instead of 'fail' on result card.
p. Diploma course failing candidates placed under compartment, appear in failed paper(s) only.
q. Better marks granted in improvement cases and compartment cases.

1.11 Eligibility and reappearance in SSC/HSSC Examination
a. Failure candidates of SSC-I/HSSC-I reappear in failed paper(s) along with SSC-II/HSSC-II.
b. Candidate failing in more than 2 subjects in SSC-II/HSSC-II shall appear in failed paper(s) only in current course.
c. Result of SSC Part-I and HSSC Part-I shall remain intact forever.
d. No additional examination chance for missed theory or practical examination.
e. Special children (physically handicapped, deaf & dumb, blind) may qualify without restriction on attempts. Exempted from all fees.
f. During specified attempts period, elective groups/subjects can be changed from practical to non-practical only.
g. Failure candidates after availing permissible chances eligible to appear as Ex/Private in SSC-I/HSSC-I or both parts.
h. Failed/absent/passed candidate can get all papers of SSC-I/HSSC-I cancelled for reappearing. Passed candidate can improve by reappearing in papers along with SSC-II/HSSC-II.
i. Passed candidate allowed reappearing in any number of papers for improvement. Previous result retained if better marks not obtained.

1.12 Second Annual Examination
a. Second Annual Examination held after declaration of Annual Examination result but before next Annual Examination.
b. Second Annual Examination open to:
(1) Candidates who fail or remain absent in First Annual Examinations.
(2) Already passed candidates for improvement or additional subject(s).
(3) Candidates who withdraw candidature before issuance of Roll No. Slips exempted from fee.
(4) Pass candidates issued result cards showing "Passed in Annual Examinations".
(5) Fresh candidates eligible to appear in either examination.

1.13 Improvement of Grade/Marks
a. Passed candidate may reappear for improvement within 4 years of passing as Ex-candidate in current course.
b. If succeeds in improving grade/marks, new Result Card issued without surrendering previous.
c. Improvement not provided to candidates from Boards other than Federal Board.
d. Candidate can improve by reappearing in any number of subjects/papers within one year of passing.
e. No application for improvement considered without prescribed fee (non-refundable).

1.14 Submission of Admission Form and Fee
a. Regular candidates submit application through head of institution.
b. Ex/Private candidates submit application attested by BPS-17 & above Government officer.
c. Institutions mailing admission forms must dispatch at least 3 days before last date.
d. No late fee if result declared after last date and form received within 15 days from result declaration.
e. Admission form accepted only with requisite fee.
f. No admission form entertained without Registration number.
g. Foreign national students charged at par with overseas Pakistani Institutions.
h. Admission form & fee must be submitted upto 10 working days before examination with penalty per day after expiry of quadruple fee schedule.

1.15 Change of elective Subject/Group/Category
a. Students permitted to change subject(s)/Group once in accordance with conditions.
b. Change allowed if absolutely necessary with Head of Institution referral and completion of required attendance.
c. Change allowed only for a particular examination.
d. After appearing at SSC-II/HSSC-II examination, no subject change allowed.
e. Change of category from regular to private after passing SSC-I/HSSC-I allowed.
f. Regular candidate change application entertained up to 30th November. Private candidate up to last date of submission of admission forms.
g. Cases not falling under rules referred to Chairman.
h. Permission once issued will not be cancelled.
i. Failure candidate may reappear as ex-candidate in same group and subjects, or change optional subjects/group, or take fresh admission, or appear as fresh private candidate.
j. Before Part-I, student may change elective subjects in same group with Principal's permission.
k. After appearing in Part-I, no change of individual subject except exceptional cases referred to Chairman.
l. Private candidate appearing in Part-I may change category to regular and seek admission in Class X/XII under conditions.

1.16 Examination of Additional Subjects
a. Passed candidate may appear in any additional subject(s) in current course not previously offered.
b. Candidate can appear in any number of additional subjects along with existing group. For subjects involving practicals, proof of performing practicals required.
c. After passing examination of foreign agency equivalent to SSC/HSSC by IBCC, may appear in additional subject(s).
d. Passing additional subject(s) yields certificate only, no bearing on grade.
e. For additional subject(s), candidate may avail two attempts.
f. Candidate may appear in Pakistan Studies and Islamiyat as additional subject(s).
g. Candidate not availing opportunity may appear in next chance if eligible.
h. After qualifying Diploma of Associate Engineer, admission for second Diploma allowed as fresh candidate with new Registration.

1.17 Constitution of Examination Centre
a. Place constituted as centre only if: (1) adequate arrangements made; (2) minimum 50 (Boys)/25 (Girls) candidates.
b. Establishment of centre at discretion of Board.
c. Chairman may permit constitution under special circumstances.
d. Special examination centre may be constituted on payment of prescribed fee.
e. Each institution shall make available all required facilities.
f. No examination centre where affiliated institution does not exist.
g. Chairman may suspend, shift or close any examination centre.
h. School/College established as examination centre for theory. Practical at students' own Alma Mater.
i. Single school/college at a station: special arrangements on payment.
j. Supervisory staff appointed one month before examination through computerized draw.

1.18 Placement in Grades
a. SSC/HSSC Certificate grades:
1. 80% and above: A1 (Exceptional)
2. 70% to below 80%: A (Excellent)
3. 60% to below 70%: B (Very good)
4. 50% to below 60%: C (Good)
5. 40% to below 50%: D (Very fair)
6. 33% to below 40%: E (Fair)

b. Diploma grades:
1. 80% and above: A1 (Excellent)
2. 70% to below 80%: A (V-Good)
3. 60% to below 70%: B (Good)
4. 50% to below 60%: C (Fair)
5. 40% to below 50%: D (Satisfactory)

1.19 Declaration of Top Positions
a. Candidate eligible for ranking who:
(1) qualifies SSC-I/HSSC-I in first/second Annual Examination in first attempt;
(2) appears in HSSC examination within 2 years of passing SSC or equivalent;
(3) admitted in class IX/X, promoted to XI/XII and appeared in both parts together.
b. Candidate not eligible if: repeats Part-I after cancellation, does not appear/pass in Part-I, avails improvement facility, remains absent in any paper of Part-I.
c. Position determined on basis of actual awards.
d. Positions on basis of highest total marks in order of merit.
e. Separate positions for each group regardless of gender.
f. Positions liable to change if discrepancy found within 6 months.
g. Board may declare as many positions as deemed necessary.

1.20 Issuance of Free of Cost Result Card
Candidates issued free Result Cards within one year after declaration of Result. Applications entertained after 10 days after result declaration.

1.21 Issuance of Duplicate Result Card
(a) Successful/failure candidate may obtain Duplicate Result Card by application to Controller of Exams (Secrecy).
(b) Fee as prescribed by Board.
(c) Dispatched through Registered Post/TCS.
(d) Word 'Duplicate' mentioned on Result Card.